# Nursery experiment

We established shade house experiment at FRC to investigate the effects of flooding on seedling wood density. We constructed a 375 m2 shade house (25 x 15 m) with a 70% single shade cloth covering all sides19,21. We partitioned the shade house into five blocks of 5 x 15m to account for potential variation in unknown environmental effects within the shade house and to control for environmental and sampling effects. Within each block, 160 seedlings were randomly positioned and spaced at 0.5 m intervals ensuring independence. Using a LAI-2000 plant canopy analyser (LI-COR, Nebraska, USA), we measured the reduction of active photosynthetic radiation under the shade cloth from full exposure. The percentage of direct sunlight under the shade cloth was similar to a large forest gap (22.4% ±1.8 SD) reflected the conditions of the field experiment19.

Ten species from our collection were used in this experiment to enable trait-based analysis in response to the treatments. Nine out of ten species were present in both experiments, with S. johorensis only being present in this one. Each species had 80 individual seedlings equitably distributed across the treatment gradient and between experimental blocks. Seedlings were collected from 92 different mothers across four locations in Sabah (Table. S1). Mothers were distributed as evenly as possible throughout the experiment by block and treatment. Seedlings were approximately 16 months old when the experiment began. Six weeks before the start of the experiment, each seedling was transferred to a larger 15 x 20 cm polybag not to restrict possible root growth during the experiment. We placed each seedling in a 5 L plastic water bottle with the top removed and were transferred from the nursery to a random position for six weeks of acclimation.

Inundation treatments were designed to mimic the variable inundation cycles in the forest, which depend predominantly on the interactions between micro-topography soil drainage and rainfall to control the frequency and duration of water inundation. The experiment ran for 84 days, similar in duration to the wetter period of the year and one census interval of the field experiment. Seven treatment levels and a control partitioned seedlings into varying levels of inundation (8 levels in total). We induced inundation by filling 5L water to the base of the stem. To drain, we emptied the water and remove the plugs from the base of the surrounding containers. In the most extreme group, we inundated seedlings for the entire duration of the experiment. In the remainder of the treatment groups, we alternated inundation with periods of drainage. One step down in treatment intensity, we treated seedlings 18 days inundated and three days drained; and at the next level, 15 days inundated six days drained. These reductions in treatment intensity continue until seedlings were not inundated (drained/inundated: t1=21/0, t2=18/3, t3=15/6, t4=12/9, t5=9/12, t6=6/15, t7=3/18 and t8=0/21). We repeated these cycles four-times, resulting in the 84 days of experimentation.

Nursery experiment measurements. All surplus seedling stocks, not used in the experiment, were used to calculate a baseline wood density. We sampled a 3-5cm piece of wood from the base of the stem. As stems were small, we used a pycnometer and balance to measure the volume. The sample was oven-dried at 105°C for 48 hours and weighed to calculate the dry mass per volume. The number of individuals harvested per species depended upon the available quantity (mean individuals per species was 19 ± 10 SD for a total of 194 individuals, see Table S2). We measured the diameter at the start of the experiment, to provide a metric for plant size. At the end of the experiment, we calculated the wood density of all surviving seedlings using the same procedure as above (n = 58X). To calculate the change in wood density, we used the subtracted the species baseline means from the final value of each sample.
